## Insights From Fitbit Fitness Data
###### _Tsegaye Himbego_

This data analysis project was completed on May 23, 2022 as a requirement for a _Google Data Analytics Certificate_ program offered by _Coursera_ through Futuro Health's _Healthcare Data Analytics_ training program. The layout of this report follows the six stages of Google Data Analytics, namely _Asking_ the business question, _Preparing,_ _Processing,_ and _Analyzing_data, _Sharing_ the findings, and taking _Action._
#### Asking (Business Question)
The goal of the project is to gain insights from Fitbit's fitness data to inform Bellabeat's marketing strategy. Bellabeat is a small, successful high-tech manufacturer of health-focused products for women and the company would like to become a larger player in the global smart device market.
#### Preparation
A dataset of 18-tables from Fitbit Fitness Tracker Data in “.csv” format, was downloaded from <b> _[Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/arashnic/fitbit)_ </b> website, on April 14, 2022 and stored in a local machine.
#### Processing
The 18-table dataset was read into R using RStudio. After exploring the data with Excel and R, _seven_ of the tables were selected for analysis and these were cleaned and processed, as a result of which _twenty-nine_ more tables were created. The complete, annotated R code used to explore and process the original data is found <b>[here](https://github.com/tsegayeh/InsightsFromFitBitData/blob/main/HDAcapstone.R)</b>. Note, however, that the original dataset needs to be downloaded from the aforementioned <b> _[Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/arashnic/fitbit)_ </b> website in order to reproduce the results with the code; it is not added to this repository.<br />
##### _Highlights_ of exploration and processing:
  * _Variables:_ Ten variables that are directly related to fitness activities were identifiable in the dataset, namely _Distance, Steps, Intensity, Calories, METs, Heart Rate, Sleep_ (state, duration, frequency), _Weight, Fat,_ and _BMI._ Some of these are recorded at _daily, hourly, minutely,_ or even at _seconds_ level.
  * _Users:_ overall, there are 33 users of fitness tracking devices in the dataset. However, the number of users varies across activities. For example, all the 33 users have their _Distance, Steps, Intensity, Calories, METs_ data recorded while 24 users have _Sleep._ records. Heart rate data is available only for 14 users while _Weight,_ and _Fat_ data are only available for 8 or less users and were not considered for analysis.  No description of the FitBit device users, such as sex and age, is provided.
  * _Period covered:_ generally, the dataset covers a 31-day period, from April 12 to May 12, 2016. Some users have data covering for a periods as short as 4 days.
  * _Data type:_ _Id_ columns in all the tables were in integer format while the date and time columns were in _character_ format. _Id_ was, therefore, changed to _character_ or _factor_ format while date and time were changed to _‘date’_ data type. Also note that, to facilitate aggregation, the minute-level and second-level data into hourly and daily levels, the date column was split into Date, AM/PM, Hour, and Minute columns.
  * _Redundancy:_ Three of the tables, namely the Daily Calories, Daily intensities and Daily Steps were duplicates of the respective columns in the Daily Activities table. Therefore, these 3 tables were maintained instead of the said table.
  * _Data Integrity:_ The sum of hourly and minutely amounts of _Calories, Intensity,_ and _Steps_ did not add up to the daily amounts. In such cases, the minute-level data were aggregated to hourly or daily levels. <br />
  * For aggregation purposes, the data were also summarized by user, Date, hour of the day to see patterns in these three dimensions. For categorical variables that are not quantitative, i.e., _state of sleep_, the category values were cross tabulated with the _Id_ or _Date_ in order that the frequencies could be used for analysis.
#### Analysis
The data were analyzed primarily using the R and Tableau software. A total of 27 tables were used for analysis, among which 8 were selected from the original  tables, cleaned and processed. The rest 19 of the tables were created from the 8 tables of cleaned data, agregating data by _user,_ to see patterns across the 33 users; by _date,_ to see patterns across the 31 days; and by _hour_ of the day to see patterns across a 24-hour day. The cleaned and processed dataset is available in this repository. A complete, annotated R code used to analyze the data is found <b>[here](https://github.com/tsegayeh/InsightsFromFitBitData/blob/main/HDAcapstone.R)</b>. 
#### Sharing: Summary Findings 
**_Patterns Across Users_** <br />
_a) Attendance._ To see the patterns of fitness activities of the tracking device users, the dates of each activity (y-axis) are mapped against the user’s ID (x-axis) to create a Gantt chart. The dates ranged from April 12, 2016 to May 12, 2016 (bottom-up on y-axis). The following chart is a graphic representation of which day the user performed an activity on. The white, blank spots represent the days on which activity was not performed or recorded. See the chart on Tableau Public <b> _[here](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/tsegaye2291/viz/Summary_Patterns/DatesvsUsers)_. </b> As it can be noticed, the bottom five variables in the chart _(Distance, Intensity, Calories, Steps, METs)_ have the same pattern with most days performed. More accurately, the number of days on which the users performed the fitness activities were tallied as follows:
 _19 users for 31 days,
 4 users for 30 days,
 1 user  for 29 days,
 3 users for 28 days,
 2 users for 26 days,
 1 user  for 20 days,
 2 users for 18 days,
 1 user  for  4 days._
<br />	   
For the other three variables at the top of the chart _(Heart rate, Sleep, Weight)_, the number of users dropped from 33 to 24 for _Heart Rate_, to 14 for _Sleep_, and to 8 for _Weight_. Yet, the performance or record of the activities for these users was mostly intermittent. <br /> <br />
_b) Measures vs. Attendance (Dates) Across Users._ Average values of the variables – _Distance, Density, Intensity, Steps, Calories and METs_ – were plotted against the dates of activities for each user (see below). The peaks of the graph are associated with users who performed the activity on all or most of the days. However, this hasn’t always been true. For example, User ‘1927…. ’ with a 31-day performance scored the least value in terms of activity measures, whereas, user ‘4057…. ’  with only a four-day performance scored much higher than User ‘1927…. ’. Therefore, no consistent pattern of fitness activities measures was observed across the users. See chart <b> _[here](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/tsegaye2291/viz/Summary_x/UserlyPattern)_.</b> <br /><br />
**_Patterns Across Days._** When the average values of each variable were plotted against the dates, a pattern was observed in that the highest values were recorded on April 30 for most variables, while the lowest values were recorded on May 12. Although it is not clear why the values were the highest on April 30, it is noticed that on May 12, a number of users have not performed the activities and their data might not have been included since it is a cut-off date. See chart <b> _[here](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/tsegaye2291/viz/Summary_x/DailyPattern)_. </b> <br /><br />
**_Patterns Across Hours of a Day._** A distinct pattern occurred when the average hourly data for Steps, Intensity, Calories and METs were plotted against the 24 hours of a day. Typically, fitness activities start peaking up around 4 a.m. in the morning and keep rising until it forms a peak between 12 a.m. and 2 p.m. Then occurs a significant dip at 3 p.m. until it rises again and forms a second peak between 5 p.m. and 7 p.m. Finally, it sharply declines until it tappers off at 3 a.m. See chart <b> _[here](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/tsegaye2291/viz/Summary_x/HourlyPatterns)_. </b> <br /><br />
**Correlation Between Variables.** Analysis was made to see if there is any Correlation among the 5 of the variables that involved all the 33 users. The variables being _Steps, Distance, Intensity, Calories,_ and _METs_ (excluding those variables with 24 or less users), a positive correlation was found between the pairs of the variables with a correlation coefficient value of 0.6 or greater. _Intensity, Distance_ and _Steps_ each have a correlation coefficient of 0.6 when paired _Calories_ while _Distance_ and _Steps_ have the strongest correlation, a correlation coefficient of 1. See correlation plot <b> _[here](https://github.com/tsegayeh/InsightsFromFitBitData/blob/main/Images/corrPlot5vars.png)_ </b> in this repsitory, as well as <b> _[here](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/tsegaye2291/viz/fitbitDataInsight/Correlations5dfs)_ </b> on Tableau Public. For correlation among all the seven variables, including _Heart Rate_ and _Sleep_, see Tableau chart <b> _[here](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/tsegaye2291/viz/fitbitDataInsight/Correlations5dfs)_ </b>.
#### Action: Insights and Recommendations
###### (1) Analysis of the data indicated that the overall device usage by the users was intermittent and mostly incomplete. That may mean, either the fitness devices were unable to track and capture the full amount of data (all activities/variables, all days, all users). Or else, the users have not been fully performing.<br />
>> **_Recommendation:_** Enhance Bellabeat App.  Bellabeat may increase user engagement in fitness activities. It takes a two-pronged strategy to achieve this. On the one hand, it would be necessary to make sure that all its tracking devices as well as the Bellabeat App are tracking and capturing the full data for all fitness activities. Reviewing its user data would be a good starting point. <br />
On the other hand, Bellabeat may need to be more aggressive in reaching out to its users by improving its communication and feedback system, including: _Alerts_ – to remind users, e.g., starting times of fitness activities; _Notification_ – to notify performance status, e.g., attended or missed fitness activity; and _Feedback_ – to provide information on both performance and results of fitness activities, e.g., graphically, in a form of dashboard.
 
###### (2) The relationship between attendance and results has not been consistent across users. That is, users who regularly carried out a fitness activity did not always have a higher result for a given activity, and vice versa. For example, a user with only 4 days of activities had a result higher than some who performed the activity every single day for the whole 31-day period. This indicates that the rate of progress towards a fitness goal depends on the individual user.<br />
>> **_Recommendation:_** Strengthen Bellabeat Membership. Usage data shows that the need for support is so variable among the users. Bellabeat, therefore, can strengthen its current membership service by adding member services that are customized to individual members. This could range from ordinary customer support service to an at-home gym with a Hi-Tech Mirror. <br />
>> <br />
###### (3) The typical two-hump graph of hourly activities indicated that there are two peak periods of activities on a typical day, the first one from 10 a.m. – 2 p.m. and the second from 5 p.m. – 7 p.m. with a characteristic dip at 3 p.m.<br />
>> **_Recommendation:_** Bellabeat can target these two critical periods of fitness activity, i.e., 10 a.m. – 2 p.m. and 5 p.m. 7 p.m., for promotional and customer service purposes. 
